---
title: www2003 day 2
author: Matt Biddulph
type: post
date: 2003-05-23T11:19:54+00:00
excerpt: \n
url: /2003/05/23/www2003-day-2/
categories:
  - events

---
After such an intense day of note taking and a very entertaining evening bowling with the guys from [ILRT][1] on [day 1][2], I didn&#8217;t manage to take proper notes on yesterday&#8217;s sessions. I&#8217;ll try to fill in some detail during today.

<!--more-->

  
9.00 Extrapolation Methods for Accelerating PageRank Computations  
The much-slashdotted algorithm for improving the sort of calculations google does. The speaker notes that this algorithm by itself only gives 30-50% improvement; it needs combining with other techniques. He also notes that this is not &#8220;accelerating google&#8221;, it&#8217;s research work.

09.30 P2Cast: Peer-to-peer Patching Scheme for VoD Service  
Using bittorrent-like peer to peer connections for distributing video content, but in a way that allows for streaming.

11.00 W3C Standards for Web Services update  
Web Services Architecture, Web Services Description Language 1.2, SOAP 1.2, Internationalization and Web Services  
Not much to say &#8211; just reports on activity so far, very uninspiring. Like being read company end-of-year reports.

14.00 Plenaries  
&#8220;Leonardo&#8217;s Laptop: Human Needs and the New Computing Technologies&#8221;, largely content-free and hyperbolic  
&#8220;Globalities, Spatialities and it Strategies: New Web Politics and Social Development&#8221;, largely incomprehensible. Looked like the slides had some interesting stats, although some of the graphs looked like a game of missile command.

16.00 Application Specific Data Replication for Edge Services  
Interesting ideas on exploiting your particular application&#8217;s usage patterns when distributing data to edge servers (akamai-style). For example, ad servers don&#8217;t need the exact inventory of ads, they just need _an_ ad that matches adequate criteria for display (if your inventory is large enough).

 [1]: https://www.ilrt.bristol.ac.uk/
 [2]: /archives/000032.html